Porting to DSL2 (#42)
qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq: README.md

> # ![nf-core/bamtofastq](docs/images/nf-core-bamtofastq_logo_light.png#gh-light-mode-only) ![nf-core/bamtofastq](docs/images/nf-core-bamtofastq_logo_dark.png#gh-dark-mode-only)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ![qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq](docs/images/qbic-pipelines-bamtofastq_logo_light.png#gh-light-mode-only) ![qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq](docs/images/qbic-pipelines-bamtofastq_logo_dark.png#gh-dark-mode-only)
```

> [![GitHub Actions CI Status](https://github.com/nf-core/bamtofastq/workflows/nf-core%20CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/nf-core/bamtofastq/actions?query=workflow%3A%22nf-core+CI%22)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[![GitHub Actions CI Status](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/workflows/nf-core%20CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/actions?query=workflow%3A%22nf-core+CI%22)
```

> [![GitHub Actions Linting Status](https://github.com/nf-core/bamtofastq/workflows/nf-core%20linting/badge.svg)](https://github.com/nf-core/bamtofastq/actions?query=workflow%3A%22nf-core+linting%22)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[![GitHub Actions Linting Status](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/workflows/nf-core%20linting/badge.svg)](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/actions?query=workflow%3A%22nf-core+linting%22)
```

> [![AWS CI](https://img.shields.io/badge/CI%20tests-full%20size-FF9900?logo=Amazon%20AWS)](https://nf-co.re/bamtofastq/results)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [![Cite with Zenodo](http://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX-1073c8)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX)

Reviewer: there is a zenodo id around for sure, should be added here

Reviewer: [10.5281/zenodo.4022137](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4022137)

[![Nextflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow%20DSL2-%E2%89%A521.10.3-23aa62.svg)](https://www.nextflow.io/)
[![run with conda](http://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-conda-3EB049?logo=anaconda)](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)
[![run with docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-docker-0db7ed?logo=docker)](https://www.docker.com/)
[![run with singularity](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-singularity-1d355c.svg)](https://sylabs.io/docs/)

> [![Launch on Nextflow Tower](https://img.shields.io/badge/Launch%20%F0%9F%9A%80-Nextflow%20Tower-%234256e7)](https://tower.nf/launch?pipeline=https://github.com/nf-core/bamtofastq)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[![Launch on Nextflow Tower](https://img.shields.io/badge/Launch%20%F0%9F%9A%80-Nextflow%20Tower-%234256e7)](https://tower.nf/launch?pipeline=https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq)
```

> [![Get help on Slack](http://img.shields.io/badge/slack-nf--core%20%23bamtofastq-4A154B?logo=slack)](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/bamtofastq)
> [![Follow on Twitter](http://img.shields.io/badge/twitter-%40nf__core-1DA1F2?logo=twitter)](https://twitter.com/nf_core)
> [![Watch on YouTube](http://img.shields.io/badge/youtube-nf--core-FF0000?logo=youtube)](https://www.youtube.com/c/nf-core)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Introduction

<!-- TODO nf-core: Write a 1-2 sentence summary of what data the pipeline is for and what it does -->

> **nf-core/bamtofastq** is a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline that converts (un)mapped `.bam` files into `fq.gz` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**nf-core/bamtofastq** is a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline that converts (un)mapped single-end or paired-end `bam` or `cram` files to fastq.gz`.bam` files into `fq.gz` files.
```

> Initially, it auto-detects, whether the input file contains single-end or paired-end reads. Following this step, the reads are sorted using `samtools collate` and extracted with `samtools fastq`. Furthermore, for mapped bam files it is possible to only convert reads mapping to a specific region or chromosome. The obtained FastQ files can then be used to further process with other pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, it auto-detects, whether the input file contains single-end or paired-end reads. Following this step, the reads are sorted using `samtools collate` and extracted with `samtools fastq`. Furthermore, for mapped bam/cram files it is possible to only convert reads mapping to a specific region or chromosome. The obtained FastQ files can then be used to further process with other pipelines.
```

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io), a workflow tool to run tasks across multiple compute infrastructures in a very portable manner. It uses Docker/Singularity containers making installation trivial and results highly reproducible. The [Nextflow DSL2](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/dsl2.html) implementation of this pipeline uses one container per process which makes it much easier to maintain and update software dependencies. Where possible, these processes have been submitted to and installed from [nf-core/modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) in order to make them available to all nf-core pipelines, and to everyone within the Nextflow community!

> <!-- TODO nf-core: Add full-sized test dataset and amend the paragraph below if applicable -->
> 
> On release, automated continuous integration tests run the pipeline on a full-sized dataset on the AWS cloud infrastructure. This ensures that the pipeline runs on AWS, has sensible resource allocation defaults set to run on real-world datasets, and permits the persistent storage of results to benchmark between pipeline releases and other analysis sources. The results obtained from the full-sized test can be viewed on the [nf-core website](https://nf-co.re/bamtofastq/results).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Pipeline summary

<!-- TODO nf-core: Fill in short bullet-pointed list of the default steps in the pipeline -->

> 1. Read QC ([`FastQC`](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. BAM/CRAM QC ([`FastQC`](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/))
```

2. Present QC for raw reads ([`MultiQC`](http://multiqc.info/))

## Quick Start

1. Install [`Nextflow`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html#installation) (`>=21.10.3`)

2. Install any of [`Docker`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/), [`Singularity`](https://www.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/) (you can follow [this tutorial](https://singularity-tutorial.github.io/01-installation/)), [`Podman`](https://podman.io/), [`Shifter`](https://nersc.gitlab.io/development/shifter/how-to-use/) or [`Charliecloud`](https://hpc.github.io/charliecloud/) for full pipeline reproducibility _(you can use [`Conda`](https://conda.io/miniconda.html) both to install Nextflow itself and also to manage software within pipelines. Please only use it within pipelines as a last resort; see [docs](https://nf-co.re/usage/configuration#basic-configuration-profiles))_.

3. Download the pipeline and test it on a minimal dataset with a single command:

   ```console

>    nextflow run nf-core/bamtofastq -profile test,YOURPROFILE --outdir <OUTDIR>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   nextflow run qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq -profile test,YOURPROFILE --outdir <OUTDIR>
```

   ```

   Note that some form of configuration will be needed so that Nextflow knows how to fetch the required software. This is usually done in the form of a config profile (`YOURPROFILE` in the example command above). You can chain multiple config profiles in a comma-separated string.

   > - The pipeline comes with config profiles called `docker`, `singularity`, `podman`, `shifter`, `charliecloud` and `conda` which instruct the pipeline to use the named tool for software management. For example, `-profile test,docker`.

>    > - Please check [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs#documentation) to see if a custom config file to run nf-core pipelines already exists for your Institute. If so, you can simply use `-profile <institute>` in your command. This will enable either `docker` or `singularity` and set the appropriate execution settings for your local compute environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > - Please check [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs#documentation) to see if a custom config file to run nf-core pipelines already exists for your Institute. If so, you can simply use `-profile <institute>` in your command. This will enable either `docker` or `singularity` and set the appropriate execution settings for your local compute environment. The nf-core configs are available also for this pipeline.
```

   > - If you are using `singularity`, please use the [`nf-core download`](https://nf-co.re/tools/#downloading-pipelines-for-offline-use) command to download images first, before running the pipeline. Setting the [`NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` or `singularity.cacheDir`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/singularity.html?#singularity-docker-hub) Nextflow options enables you to store and re-use the images from a central location for future pipeline runs.
   > - If you are using `conda`, it is highly recommended to use the [`NXF_CONDA_CACHEDIR` or `conda.cacheDir`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/conda.html) settings to store the environments in a central location for future pipeline runs.

4. Start running your own analysis!

   <!-- TODO nf-core: Update the example "typical command" below used to run the pipeline -->

   ```console

>    nextflow run nf-core/bamtofastq --input '*.bam' --outdir <OUTDIR> -profile <docker/singularity/podman/shifter/charliecloud/conda/institute>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   nextflow run qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq --input '*.bam' --outdir <OUTDIR> -profile <docker/singularity/podman/shifter/charliecloud/conda/institute>
```

   ```

## Documentation

> The nf-core/bamtofastq pipeline comes with documentation about the pipeline [usage](https://nf-co.re/bamtofastq/usage), [parameters](https://nf-co.re/bamtofastq/parameters) and [output](https://nf-co.re/bamtofastq/output).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq pipeline comes with documentation about the pipeline [usage](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/docs/usage.md), [parameters](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/parameters) and [output](https://github.com/qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq/docs/output.md).
```

probably need to double check the links. the parameter rendering may be an issue. can ask robert how he handled this for bactopia

If you would like to contribute to this pipeline, please see the [contributing guidelines](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md).

> For further information or help, don't hesitate to get in touch on the [Slack `#bamtofastq` channel](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/bamtofastq) (you can join with [this invite](https://nf-co.re/join/slack)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further information or help, don't hesitate to get in touch by opening an issue.
```

## Citations

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add citation for pipeline after first release. Uncomment lines below and update Zenodo doi and badge at the top of this file. -->

> <!-- If you use  nf-core/bamtofastq for your analysis, please cite it using the following doi: [10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX) -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- If you use  qbic-pipelines/bamtofastq for your analysis, please cite it using the following doi: [10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX) -->
```
